- [Instructor] Hi and welcome
back to the programme.
In this video we're
looking at if statements.
First thing to do again is
create a new file and save it.
That's if statements dot py.
And we've looked at if
statements before when we have
a variable should app.
Such as should continue
if it's true
if should continue
it's true then we can print
something out like hello.
Now let's go back to the
terminal and do python
three point five if statements,
and that prints out hello
as you would expect.
Now what do you think happens
if I remove equal equal true?
What do you think happens
if I run this again?
Will we get something printed out?
Will we get an error?
Will we get nothing printed out?
We'll still get hello and that's because
the equal equal true
is not necessary.
We can say if we should continue
print hello that kind of
makes sense.
Obviously the variable
name could be anything.
In this case it maybe
doesn't make as much sense.
But nevertheless the equal
equal true is implied
if we don't include anything.
So this means if should continue is true.
So we don't need to include
the is true basically.
So let's create a list of
known people known people.
And that's gonna be something
like John, Anna, Mary
for example.
And then we're gonna say
ask for user for a value.
So we're gonna say person equal input
enter the person you know.
So how would we now check
that the person the user knows,
the person they're gonna
type the name of is
in our known people?
We've not covered this before
so I wouldn't expect you to necessarily
know it but some internet research
goes a long way for example.
But nevertheless, I
also wouldn't expect you
to research everything
or else this wouldn't
really be a course.
So what we can do is we say
if person in known people
print you know this person.
Okay let's run that and see what happens.
Well as we would expect
we get a prompt saying
enter the person you
know because that's what
the input method has.
So I'm gonna enter John
and then it tells me that
I know this person.
So let's run it again.
And now enter something
else like Rolf and we don't
get anything.
Which is not ideal.
We should probably get
something saying you don't
know this person.
So we can do that.
We can say if person not
in known people print
you don't know this person.
Python is quite nice
that you can use proper
English words such as in and not in.
So let's run this again and
put in Rolf and now I'm gonna
press enter and you
know what's gonna come.
And that is that you
don't know this person.
This is nice.
We've got two if statements.
If the person is in the known
people then we print out
that we know this person and
if it's not then we print
that we do not know.
But there is a couple of
problems really with this.
We've got some code that is
duplicated such as person
and known people in known people really.
So if we wanted to change
like the name of this variable
to people we know.
Not a very good change but
we would have to change
it here and also here.
So it's not a 100% perfect.
And also our programme is going to come in
run this if statement.
Basically it's gonna check
if person is in this list
and it's gonna say no
it isn't or yes it is
depending on the person.
And then it's gonna come
down here and it's gonna
check it again.
So if the person is in the
known people it's gonna print
you know this person and
then it's gonna check
if the person isn't in known people.
And that doesn't make sense
because it already knows
that it is the known people
so why would it check
if it isn't?
And you would be completely
right it's not really necessary.
So instead we can have
a compound if statement.
If the person is in the
known people print this out
and if not print this other thing out.
So what happens now is
that if this is true
then we run this thing here
and if this is not true
then we run this other thing here.
We don't have to check two things.
Naturally if this is true
then we will print out
that you know this person
and then it will just kind of
go to the end and it will
skip this bit entirely
which is a lot nicer.
Okay so just one more thing
before the end of this video.
Printing out you know this
person is good but we could
also print out the name of the person.
So let's do that.
And I'm gonna say you know
open and closing bracket.
And you don't know open
and closing bracket.
So we're gonna substitute
open and closing bracket
for the person's name.
And the way we do that is we
say after the quotation mark
we're gonna say don't format person.
And what this dot format method does
it is going to essentially format
this string by replacing
this pair of colour braces
by the parameter or the
argument to the format method.
So this person which is the
user input is then gonna go
in here.
Let's run this and give it a go.
Enter the person you know,
Rolf, and it says now
you don't know Rolf, which is great.
So what we've looked at
here is if statements
and compound if statements
and also at the format method.
The format method's really
great because we can
substitute things in strings very easily.
We're gonna be exploring more
use cases of the format method
in the next video and we're
gonna have a wee programming
exercise for you to complete
in the next video as well.
So I'll see you in the very next video.